Blog post about Solaris (#100)
r-hub/blog: content/post/2020-05-07-solaris/index.Rmd

---
slug: checking-your-r-package-on-solaris
title: Checking your R package on Solaris
authors:
- Gábor Csárdi
date: "2020-05-08"
tags:
- package development
- solaris
output:
  html_document:
    keep_md: true
---

```{r include = FALSE}
options(width = 60)
```

## TL;DR

> 1. To check your package on Solaris, call `rhub::check()` as usual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To check your package on Solaris, call [`rhub::check()`](https://r-hub.github.io/rhub/reference/check.html) as usual
```

2. Bookmark this page, in case you get an email from CRAN about your
   package failing on Solaris.

## Oracle Solaris

[Oracle Solaris](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_\(operating_system\))
is a non-free Unix operating system. CRAN regularly tests R packages on
Solaris 10. This is a post about checking that your R package on
Solaris, using R-hub, and how you can create your own Solaris virtual
machine to debug your R code.

## OpenCSW

[OpenCSW](https://www.opencsw.org/about/) is a repository of open source
software packages. It uses a package manager tool called `pkgutil`.
`pkgutil` is similar to `apt`, `yum`, etc.

OpenCSW greatly varies in terms of how current its various packages are.
By default OpenCSW uses its "testing" distribution, which has a rolling
release model. The most recently added packages are in the "unstable"
distribution. OpenCSW unstable has now a new R 4.0.0 build, called
`r_base`. It will move to the "testing" distibution in a couple of days.
OpenCSW `r_base` 4.0.0 is one of the R builds used on R-hub's Solaris
builder.

R-hub also has a repository (catalog) of OpenCSW packages,
which we use for system requirements that are not (yet) updated in the

> official OpenCSW catalog. This catalog is at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[official OpenCSW catalog](https://files.r-hub.io/opencsw/). 
```

> https://files.r-hub.io/opencsw/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## CRAN's Solaris builder

CRAN uses two sets of compilers for their R package checks.
[Oracle Developer Studio](https://www.oracle.com/tools/developerstudio/)
(ODS) is a commercial product that supports Oracle Solaris 10. In addition,
[OpenCSW](https://www.opencsw.org/about/) packages GCC, version 5.5.0
currently.

CRAN compiles R packages with ODS by default. If ODS is not able to
compile a package, they use GCC instead. GCC should be able to compile
most (all?) CRAN R packages. Notably, Rcpp and all packages linking to it
are compiled with GCC.

> CRAN's configuration of the two compilers is here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can refer to [CRAN's configuration of the two compilers](https://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/pub/bdr/Rconfig/r-patched-solaris-x86).
```

> <https://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/pub/bdr/Rconfig/r-patched-solaris-x86>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## R-hub's Solaris builder

R-hub's setup is similar. Our Solaris virtual machine has three R
versions:
* 32-bit GCC build at `/opt/csw/bin/R`, from the OpenCSW `r_base` package.

>   The configuration of this build is in OpenCSW, see here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The configuration of this build is [in OpenCSW](https://buildfarm.opencsw.org/source/xref/opencsw/csw/mgar/pkg/r/trunk/Makefile).
```

>   <https://buildfarm.opencsw.org/source/xref/opencsw/csw/mgar/pkg/r/trunk/Makefile>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* 64-bit GCC build at `/opt/csw/bin/amd64/R`, from the same OpenCSW
  `r_base` package.

> * 32-bit ODS build, using the `config.site` file at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 32-bit ODS build, using [a `config.site` file](https://github.com/r-hub/solarischeck/blob/master/config.site.cc).
```

>   <https://github.com/r-hub/solarischeck/blob/master/config.site.cc>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> If you call `rhub::platforms()` you'll currently see two Solaris builders:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you call [`rhub::platforms()`](https://r-hub.github.io/rhub/reference/platforms.html) you'll currently see two Solaris builders:
```

* `solaris-x86-patched` uses the 32-bit GCC build of R.
* `solaris-x86-patched-ods` uses the 32-bit GCC build to install all
  dependencies of the package, but then runs `R CMD check` with the ODS
  build. This maximizes the chance of a meaningful `R CMD check` run.

> 

Reviewer: What about https://r-hub.github.io/rhub/reference/check.html?

Author: What about it?

Reviewer: I mean the solaris shortcut, should it be mentioned?

Author: Oh, right, sure. These client side shortcuts are not so great, as it turns out, because now it only has the first Solaris builder, but not the second one. Also, it is actually R-release now, but I could not change the name, because of the shortcut....

## System requirements

It is unclear how system requirements are installed on CRAN's Solaris.
R-hub's Solaris machine installs all system requirements from OpenCSW.

> The list of currently installed OpenCSW packages is at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to [the list of currently installed OpenCSW packages](ttps://github.com/r-hub/solarischeck/blob/master/sysreqs.txt).
```

> <https://github.com/r-hub/solarischeck/blob/master/sysreqs.txt>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If you need another library for your package, please let use know and

> we can install it. The current list of OpenCSW packages is at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we can install it. Find [the current list of OpenCSW packages](https://www.opencsw.org/get-it/packages/).
```

> <https://www.opencsw.org/get-it/packages/>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If the library you need is missing from OpenCSW, or it is outdated,
let us know, there is a good chance that we can add it or update it.

## Creating your own Solaris 10 VM

R-hub's Solaris check is great if you want to make sure that your package
works on Solaris before a CRAN submission. If it does not work, and the
fix is not obvious, then you probably want to debug it on a Solaris
machine.

We have a template for the [packer](https://packer.io) automated VM builder
tool that helps you do this with as little work as possible. (Which is not
the same as _little_ work, mind you!) You'll need:

* A sufficiently powerful computer to run a virtual machine.
* packer, available for Windows, macOS, Linux, free and open source.
* Virtualization software: VMware or VirtualBox. VirtualBox is open
  source and available for many platforms. VMware has free evaluation
  versions.
* You need to create an Oracle ID, and download the Oracle Solaris 10
  install DVD image and also Oracle Developer Studio. They are free for
  non-commercial use, without support.
* You need to wait about 15-30 minutes for packer to build the virtual
  machine.

> Please see our docs at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please see [the detailed steps in our docs](https://github.com/r-hub/solarischeck/tree/master/packer#readme).
```

> <https://github.com/r-hub/solarischeck/tree/master/packer#readme>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> for the detailed steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If you want to install Solaris yourself without the packer automation,

> our internal docs have a detailed walkthrough at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our internal docs have a [detailed walkthrough](https://docs.r-hub.io/technical/solaris/).
```

> <https://docs.r-hub.io/technical/solaris/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Need help? Contact us!

If creating a virtual machine is not the right solution for you, do not
despair! We have other ways to help you with your Solaris issues, please

> contact us by opening an issue at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contact us by [opening an issue](https://github.com/r-hub/rhub/issues).
```

> <https://github.com/r-hub/rhub/issues>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
